This post will guide you through the basics of EDA, the essential first
step to understand your dataset and ask the right questions. EDA is a
process that depend on iteration. So you need to:

-   Generate questions about your data.

-   Start searching for answers by visualization, transformation, and
    modeling your data.

-   Use the knowledge you obtained to refine your questions and adjust
    your strategy to attack the problem with new questions.

Professor John Tukey (Tukey, 1977) strongly advocated the practice of
exploratory data analysis (EDA) as a critical part of the scientific
process.

“No catalog of techniques can convey a willingness to look for what can
be seen, whether or not anticipated. Yet this is at the heart of
exploratory data analysis. The graph paper and transparencies are there,
not as a technique, but rather as a recognition that the picture
examining eye is the best finder we have of the wholly unanticipated.”

## What would you find in this post?

EDA covers different techniques, in this article we will focus on
descriptive statistics and visualization and how we can apply those with
R.

Descriptive statistics include:

-   Mean - arithmetic average
-   Median - middle value in the sample
-   Mode - most frequently observed value
-   Standard Deviation - variation around the mean
-   Interquartile Range - range encompasses 50% of the values between
    25% and 75% of the distribution
-   Skewness - is a measure of the asymmetry of the probability
    distribution of a real-valued random variable about its mean
-   Kurtosis - identifies whether the tails of a given distribution
    differ from the null distribution

Graphical methods include:

-   Histogram - a graphic where each bar equals to the frequency of
    observations for a given range of sample values
-   Density estimation - an estimation of the frequency distribution
    based on the sample data
-   Quantile-quantile plot - a plot of the actual data values against
    points normally distributed
-   Scatter plot - a graphical display of a variable plotted on the x
    axis against another one on the y axis
-   Box plot - a visual representation of a group of statistics such as
    median, quartiles, symmetry, skewness, and outliers

``` r
suppressMessages(library(tidyverse))
spine=read.csv('spine_3c.csv')
summary(spine)
```

    ##     plv_inc          plv_tilt       l_l_angle        sacr_slope    
    ##  Min.   : 26.15   Min.   :-6.55   Min.   : 14.00   Min.   : 13.37  
    ##  1st Qu.: 46.43   1st Qu.:10.67   1st Qu.: 37.00   1st Qu.: 33.35  
    ##  Median : 58.69   Median :16.36   Median : 49.56   Median : 42.41  
    ##  Mean   : 60.50   Mean   :17.54   Mean   : 51.93   Mean   : 42.95  
    ##  3rd Qu.: 72.88   3rd Qu.:22.12   3rd Qu.: 63.00   3rd Qu.: 52.69  
    ##  Max.   :129.83   Max.   :49.43   Max.   :125.74   Max.   :121.43  
    ##    plv_radius      grade_spondy       class              category    
    ##  Min.   : 70.08   Min.   :-11.06   Length:310         Min.   :1.000  
    ##  1st Qu.:110.71   1st Qu.:  1.60   Class :character   1st Qu.:1.000  
    ##  Median :118.27   Median : 11.77   Mode  :character   Median :2.000  
    ##  Mean   :117.92   Mean   : 26.30                      Mean   :1.871  
    ##  3rd Qu.:125.47   3rd Qu.: 41.28                      3rd Qu.:2.000  
    ##  Max.   :163.07   Max.   :418.54                      Max.   :3.000
