EDA
================
Christos\_Chalitsios
2021-01-22

This post will guide you through the basics of EDA, the essential first
step to understand your dataset and ask the right questions. EDA is a
process that depend on iteration. So you need to:

-   Generate questions about your data.
-   Start searching for answers by visualization, transformation, and
    modeling your data.
-   Use the knowledge you obtained to refine your questions and adjust
    your strategy to attack the problem with new questions.

Professor John Tukey (Tukey, 1977) strongly advocated the practice of
exploratory data analysis (EDA) as a critical part of the scientific
process.

“No catalog of techniques can convey a willingness to look for what can
be seen, whether or not anticipated. Yet this is at the heart of
exploratory data analysis. The graph paper and transparencies are there,
not as a technique, but rather as a recognition that the picture
examining eye is the best finder we have of the wholly unanticipated.”

## What would you find in this post?

EDA covers different techniques, in this article we will focus on
descriptive statistics and visualization and how we can apply those with
R.

Descriptive statistics include: - Mean - arithmetic average - Median -
middle value in the sample - Mode - most frequently observed value -
Standard Deviation - variation around the mean - Interquartile Range -
range encompasses 50% of the values between 25% and 75% of the
distribution - Skewness - is a measure of the asymmetry of the
probability distribution of a real-valued random variable about its mean
- Kurtosis - identifies whether the tails of a given distribution differ
from the null distribution

Graphical methods include: - Histogram - a graphic where each bar equals
to the frequency of observations for a given range of sample values -
Density estimation - an estimation of the frequency distribution based
on the sample data - Quantile-quantile plot - a plot of the actual data
values against points normally distributed - Scatter plot - a graphical
display of a variable plotted on the x axis against another one on the y
axis - Box plot - a visual representation of a group of statistics such
as median, quartiles, symmetry, skewness, and outliers

## Hands-on calculating some basic descriptive statistics

To perform EDA you need data so let’s load a dataset that is publicly
available in [UCI machine learning
repository](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/vertebral+column) and
dive in for the specifics. The dataset contains values for six
biomechanical features used to classify orthopaedic patients into 3
classes (normal, disk hernia or spondilolysthesis) of vertebral column
lesions.

``` r
suppressMessages(library(tidyverse))
spine=read_csv('spine_3c.csv')
```

    ## 
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## cols(
    ##   plv_inc = col_double(),
    ##   plv_tilt = col_double(),
    ##   l_l_angle = col_double(),
    ##   sacr_slope = col_double(),
    ##   plv_radius = col_double(),
    ##   grade_spondy = col_double(),
    ##   class = col_character(),
    ##   category = col_double()
    ## )

After loading the data we have to check the data types that are present
in our data and the name of the variables

``` r
glimpse(spine)
```

    ## Rows: 310
    ## Columns: 8
    ## $ plv_inc      <dbl> 63.03, 39.06, 68.83, 69.30, 49.71, 40.25, 53.43, 45.37, …
    ## $ plv_tilt     <dbl> 22.55, 10.06, 22.22, 24.65, 9.65, 13.92, 15.86, 10.76, 1…
    ## $ l_l_angle    <dbl> 39.61, 25.02, 50.09, 44.31, 28.32, 25.12, 37.17, 29.04, …
    ## $ sacr_slope   <dbl> 40.48, 29.00, 46.61, 44.64, 40.06, 26.33, 37.57, 34.61, …
    ## $ plv_radius   <dbl> 98.67, 114.41, 105.99, 101.87, 108.17, 130.33, 120.57, 1…
    ## $ grade_spondy <dbl> -0.25, 4.56, -3.53, 11.21, 7.92, 2.23, 5.99, -10.68, 13.…
    ## $ class        <chr> "DH", "DH", "DH", "DH", "DH", "DH", "DH", "DH", "DH", "D…
    ## $ category     <dbl> 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3,…

If there are categorical variables check the distribution of each level

``` r
spine%>%group_by(class)%>%count()
```

    ## # A tibble: 3 x 2
    ## # Groups:   class [3]
    ##   class     n
    ##   <chr> <int>
    ## 1 DH       60
    ## 2 NO      100
    ## 3 SL      150

Another important aspect of exploration is the normality of the
distribution for each numeric variable based on *class*. For example if
we want to check how the pelvic tilt (plv\_tilt) is distributed across
the three levels of *class* we can use:

``` r
spine1=spine %>%
    group_by(class) %>%
    mutate(n_samples = n()) %>%
    nest() %>%
    mutate(Shapiro = map(data, ~ shapiro.test(.x$plv_tilt)))
spine1
```

    ## # A tibble: 3 x 3
    ## # Groups:   class [3]
    ##   class data               Shapiro
    ##   <chr> <list>             <list> 
    ## 1 DH    <tibble [60 × 8]>  <htest>
    ## 2 SL    <tibble [150 × 8]> <htest>
    ## 3 NO    <tibble [100 × 8]> <htest>

``` r
library(broom)
spine1.glance <- spine1 %>%
   mutate(glance_shapiro = Shapiro %>% map(glance)) %>%
   unnest(glance_shapiro)
spine1.glance
```

    ## # A tibble: 3 x 6
    ## # Groups:   class [3]
    ##   class data               Shapiro statistic p.value method                     
    ##   <chr> <list>             <list>      <dbl>   <dbl> <chr>                      
    ## 1 DH    <tibble [60 × 8]>  <htest>     0.974  0.237  Shapiro-Wilk normality test
    ## 2 SL    <tibble [150 × 8]> <htest>     0.980  0.0286 Shapiro-Wilk normality test
    ## 3 NO    <tibble [100 × 8]> <htest>     0.992  0.792  Shapiro-Wilk normality test

Checking the output of the code chunk we see that the SL group is not
normally distributed since the p.value indicates rejection of the null
hypothesis for this level. So if we wish to include this variable in a
model we must consider a tranformation in a log or another scale to
surpass probable side effects. Alternatively for calculating the
shapiro-wilk statistic for a single variable not taking into account any
of the inherent levels present in the data we could just call:

``` r
shapiro.test(spine$plv_tilt)
```

    ## 
    ##  Shapiro-Wilk normality test
    ## 
    ## data:  spine$plv_tilt
    ## W = 0.96638, p-value = 1.318e-06

Calculating various descriptive statistics to understand our dataset is
also very straight-forward using the might of the tidyverse. Lets assume
we need to calculate the mean, sd, and IQR of *lumbar lordosis angle*
(l\_l\_angle)

``` r
spine.descriptives=spine%>%group_by(class)%>%
  summarise(mu=mean(plv_tilt),std=sd(plv_tilt),iqr=IQR(plv_tilt))
```

    ## `summarise()` ungrouping output (override with `.groups` argument)

``` r
spine.descriptives
```

    ## # A tibble: 3 x 4
    ##   class    mu   std   iqr
    ##   <chr> <dbl> <dbl> <dbl>
    ## 1 DH     17.4  7.02  9.12
    ## 2 NO     12.8  6.78  7.99
    ## 3 SL     20.7 11.5  15.8

Inside the
[summarise()](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/reference/summarise.html) verb
we can also use
[skewness()](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/e1071/versions/1.7-4/topics/skewness)
and
[kurtosis()](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/PerformanceAnalytics/versions/2.0.4/topics/kurtosis)
functions to calculate their values.

Again we could calculate separately all them calling the
[mean()](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/base/versions/3.6.2/topics/mean),
[sd()](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/stats/versions/3.6.2/topics/sd)
and
[IQR()](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/stats/versions/3.6.2/topics/IQR)
functions.

## Visualize data

We have several choices regarding plotting in R. Base R, Lattice and
GGplot2 are the most often used libraries for visualization. Here we
will use the [ggplot2](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/) library because
it is widely adopted and it is relatively easy to produce custom,
informative and beautiful plots. GGplot is based on the [grammar of
graphics](https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9780387245447) principles

Histogram is the first type of plot that is essential for EDA. In ggplot
a histogram with the default bins can be obtained calling:

``` r
ggplot(spine,aes(plv_tilt))+geom_histogram(bins = 30)+
  theme_bw()
```

![](EDA_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-8-1.svg)<!-- -->

That was easy! just plug the data set and the aisthetics(aes) into the
ggplot() function add the desired geom\_, in our case histogram and
voila. Let’s make our histogram a little more informative using a pre
specified condition for coloring the bins according to categorical
variable in our dataset

``` r
ggplot(spine,aes(plv_tilt,fill=class))+geom_histogram(bins = 30)+
  theme_bw()
```

![](EDA_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-9-1.svg)<!-- -->

Now it is easy to observe the differences in the distribution of
*pelvic\_tilt* across the different levels of *class*. In almost the
same way the density function can be displayed

``` r
ggplot(spine,aes(plv_tilt,fill=class,color=class))+geom_density()+
  theme_bw()
```

![](EDA_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-10-1.svg)<!-- -->

The quantile-quantile (q-q) plot is a graphical technique for
determining if two data sets come from populations with a common
distribution. Producing this plot is a way to visualize normal
distribution deviations

``` r
ggplot(spine, aes(sample = plv_tilt)) +
  stat_qq() +
  stat_qq_line()+theme_bw()
```

![](EDA_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-11-1.svg)<!-- -->

The code below explores *pelvic\_tilt* in all three levels of the
*class* variable.

``` r
ggplot(spine, aes(sample = plv_tilt,colour = class))+
  stat_qq() +
  stat_qq_line()+theme_bw()
```

![](EDA_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-12-1.svg)<!-- -->

We can see the deviation from the 45 degree line for the *SL* level of
*class*. We previously observed that when we tested for normality with
the shapiro.wilk test.

Scatterplots are commonly used to explore two conitnuous variables

``` r
ggplot(spine,aes(plv_tilt,grade_spondy))+geom_point()+
  theme_bw()
```

![](EDA_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-13-1.svg)<!-- -->

It seems that there is some kind of linear relationship between the
variables and also an extreme value that is probably an outlier. We can
go a step further just by adding some color at the points.

``` r
ggplot(spine,aes(plv_tilt,grade_spondy,color=class))+geom_point()+
  theme_bw()
```

![](EDA_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-14-1.svg)<!-- -->

Just by looking at the graph a very interesting pattern emerges!
Remember the linear trend we observed? it seems that only resides in the
data points of the *SL* level of the *class* variable.
